[Music]
hello and welcome history buffs my name
is Nick Hodges and in this very special
episode to celebrate reaching over
250,000 subscribers will be leaving the
confines of our planet and venturing far
out into space onboard Apollo 13
it's April 1970 less than a year has
passed since Neil Armstrong became the
first man to set foot on the moon on
Apollo 11
since then Apollo 12 made an equally
successful landing and NASA is now
launched Apollo 13 also intended to land
on the moon but 56 hours later and over
200,000 miles from Earth an unforeseen
accident occurs that jeopardizes the
lives the entire crew this film is based
on the true story of what those
astronauts went through and the
collaborative effort of Mission Control
to bring them back home alive and over
the course of this review I'll be
discussing in great length the history
of the space race I'll be covering
Apollo 13 mission and finally discuss
how faithful was the film to what
actually happened this is Apollo 13
[Music]
isn't it super awesome that we now live
in a time where we can look back on our
own history and know that we have
traveled into space not only that but we
have walked on the surface of the Moon
the very celestial body that every
single human being that has ever lived
has gazed upon it truly does capture the
imagination and not the long ago such an
idea only existed in the realm of
science fiction in 1865 Jules Verne
published the book from the earth to the
moon and got remarkably close to how it
actually happened just over a century
later for the Apollo 8 mission in 1968
for example he decided that out of all
the nations on earth that America would
be the one to do it
and through his calculations he
predicted that the launch site would be
in southern Florida he predicted there
would be in the month of December there
would take three days to travel to the
moon and that the capsule would return
to Earth by being recovered at sea the
only big thing he got wrong was that in
real life a rocket was used whilst the
Americans in his book used a giant
cannon but even so it's pretty amazing
on how much he was able to get right so
the question stands how did the romantic
idea of traveling to the moon make the
transition from science fiction to
science fact well the roots of mankind's
greatest journey can be found at the end
of World War two in September 1944 and
Hitler is desperate to find a solution
in winning the war that was when he
unleashed a new secret weapon the v2
rocket the world's first ballistic
missile packed with explosives the
Vita's were launched against allied
cities such as Paris Antwerp and London
although a terrifying weapon it's
important to note that this was the
first man-made object to cross the
boundary of space before falling back to
earth and hitting its targets and this
was certainly not lost on the German
rocket scientists who developed it his
name was Werner von Braun his life's
work had always been in the pursuit of
space travel and with his rocket
technology he was convinced that it was
the key
- reaching the heavens in fact you could
say he was pretty much obsessed with
this and all other potential moral
ambiguities were considered secondary
for example later in life when he was
questioned about his v2 rockets he's
quoted as saying the rocket worked
perfectly except for landing on the
wrong planet so when he joined the Nazi
Party in 1937 he saw it as a career move
one that would get him all the funding
he would ever need to realize his dream
in the final days of the war the Allies
and the Soviets were pushing further and
further into Germany secretly both sides
were searching for von Braun as they
could see the terrible potential his
weapons had particularly the Americans
as they were already developing their
own super weapon at the time
if von Braun's rocket technology could
be combined with the atomic bomb it
would be the most destructive weapon in
history neither the Americans nor the
Soviets knew it yet
but they had just taken the first steps
and what eventually became the space
race now von Braun was perfectly aware
that the Third Reich's days were
numbered and if he wished to continue
pursuing his dream of space travel it
would have to be elsewhere especially
since he knew that the Nazi officers who
are protecting him and his team were
under orders to shoot him if it looked
like he was going to fall in enemy hands
so obviously he had to escape and
weighed his options on who to surrender
to the Soviets were the less desirable
choice since it was well known how they
treated their prisoners only real option
was to surrender to the Americans and
after has escaped that's exactly what he
did in exchange for his full cooperation
and knowledge of the beatty rocket
program
von Braun will be given full immunity
and was whisked away to the United
States with von Braun out of their reach
the Soviets now had to play catch-up by
scavenging abandoned v2 rocket factories
and finding other German rocket
engineers who had been left behind in
East Germany they would also recruit one
man to take von Braun's position as
chief designer in their rocket program
and that man
sergei korolev now he had been falsely
imprisoned during the Great Purge under
acts of sabotage in the Soviets rocket
Research Institute and was sentenced to
ten years in one of Stalin's gulags in
1945 he was released after serving six
years of his ten-year sentence by
recommendation from one of the very men
who had denounced him in the first place
his old colleague Valentin Glushko now
I'm sure glushko felt incredibly awkward
about the whole situation but he was
smart enough to know that sergei korolev
was the man for the job
not only was he an innovator a genius
but for all intents and purposes he
would become von Browns rival and
ultimately his equal especially since
they both shared the same dream of space
travel on August 6 1945 the world was
stunned when America dropped the atomic
bomb on Hiroshima this only served to
strengthen Soviet resolve because not
only do the Americans possess the a-bomb
now but von Braun and his Rockets just a
month before this however a Soviet spy
called Klaus Fuchs who had been working
on the Manhattan Project stole
classified blueprints of the atom bomb
and send them to Moscow on the 2nd of
July 1945 once the Soviets witnessed the
atomic bombs true destructive power in
hiroshima and nagasaki stalin
immediately ordered that their own bombs
be built as well as continued developing
their rocket technology the Soviets were
under the natural assumption that the
next logical step for America would be
to build missiles fitted with their
atomic weapons
but surprisingly that wasn't the case
von Braun and his team weren't
continuing their research
the Americans were quite happy to let
their department collect dust preferring
to instead entrust future delivery of
the bombs be made by planes just like
they had done in Japan that was until
they got their wake-up call
on the 29th of August 1949 the first
Soviet atomic bomb was detonated on a
test site in Sammy patents Kazakhstan
this time the West was horrified
especially with how quickly the Soviet
Union was able to do it and just a month
later on the 25th of September 1949 the
Soviets had successfully launched an
improved version of the v2 rocket which
they dubbed the r2 it had twice the
range of the b2 and was capable of
hitting England 1949 was significant
because a marked the beginning of the
nuclear arms race between America and
the Soviet Union each side working
furiously to develop nuclear weapons
capable of destroying each other and
much of the time they spent doing so was
very neck-and-neck on November 1st 1952
the Americans tested the world's first
hydrogen bomb in the Pacific Ocean on
the 12th of August 1953 the Russians
develop an h-bomb of their own and
tested in Kazakhstan now some of you may
be asking what does all this have to do
with space travel well the development
of the rocket technology necessary for
space travel can only have been achieved
with military funding so when Sergei
Korolev was asked if he could build a
new rocket that can transport a
thermonuclear warhead to America he said
yes he could because he knew that same
rocket could also reach space and auto
transport and launch a satellite and
Earth's orbit the funding he got from
the Soviet Union was exactly what he
needed to make that happen in America
however von Braun was having a much
harder time selling the idea to the US
Army I was hardly getting any funding at
all for his rockets so what he decides
to do instead and I find this very funny
by the way is to go over the Army's head
and instead sell the idea of spaceflight
and traveling to the moon directly to
the American people how does he do this
well through Walt Disney of course here
to reveal a plan for a trip around the
moon is a chief of the guided missile
development at the United States Army's
Redstone Arsenal dr. Wernher
Braun a voyage around the moon must be
made in two phases a rocket ship taking
off from the Earth's surface will use
almost all the fuel it can carry just to
attain a speed great enough to balance
the pull of gravity unpowered it will
then keep circling the earth in an orbit
outside of the atmosphere this is the
first phase however if we can refuel the
ship in this orbit with fuel brought up
by cargo rocket ships it can set out on
the second phase the trip around the
moon and back this televised primetime
event may dr. Wernher von Braun a
household name has 40 million Americans
we're glued to their screens von Browns
plan absolutely worked as things began
to get moving in Washington that would
later help him get the funding he needed
for his Rockets what did we learn today
guys when someone tells you not to
follow your dreams don't just accept it
it might very well happen if you keep at
it so anyway back in the Soviet Union
Sergei Korolev was also watching how
things were developing in America
anxious to get his own satellite into
orbit first he works furiously on his r7
rocket Nikita Khrushchev the leader of
the Soviet Union told Carla that if the
r7 worked then he would be allowed to
fit the next launch with a satellite
after several failures the r7 was
finally able to launch successfully on
August 21st 1957 and travelled 3700
miles
going further than any rocket before and
capable of hitting America Sergei
Korolev can now proceed with his
satellite which they called Sputnik now
the satellite itself was very simple in
design it was just a relatively small
ball about 22 and a half inches in
diameter with for long radio antenna it
was stripped down to only the bare
essentials in orders make it light
enough to be
carried by the r7 all it needed to do
was to transmit a radio signal proving
to the world of his success on the 4th
of October 1957 the Soviets launched
Sputnik 1 the first man-made satellite
into orbit and the world took notice
today a new moon is in the sky a 23 inch
metal sphere placed in orbit by a
Russian rocket here an artist's
conception of how the feat was
accomplished a three-stage rocket number
one the booster in the class of an
intercontinental missile its weight
estimated at 50 tons
the smaller second stage took over at
five thousand miles an hour and carried
on to the highest point reached 500
miles up the artificial moon is boosted
to a speed counter balancing the pull of
gravity and released you are hearing the
actual signals transmitted by the earth
circling satellite one of the great
scientific feats of the age this was it
this was the moment that officially
started the space race it was the kick
of the proverbial backside America
needed to get them in the game its
public was awash with different emotions
some of them were excited with this
scientific breakthrough while others
were even frightened guess the American
people alarmed that a foreign country
especially an enemy country can do this
if we fear this but more than fear more
than excitement the biggest thing
Sputnik did was sting America's pride
and they couldn't let that slide however
whilst America was rushing in with her
own satellite the Russians were already
thinking one step ahead on November 3rd
1957 Sputnik 2 was launched but this was
no mere satellite onboard a carried a
dog called Leica the first living
creature into space the purpose of the
experiment was to see if an animal or
eventually a human could survive the
stress of leaving Earth's atmosphere it
was a complete success although rather
sadly Lika only survived for five hours
in Earth's orbit if was succumbing to
heat exhaustion many people were
outraged that the Soviets didn't even
attempt to come up with a way to bring
her back down beforehand regardless it
was clear to everyone that the Cold War
would not only take place on earth but
in outer space and four years Wernher
von Braun had been fighting to make his
voice heard in the military but
bureaucracy and politics had always
stood in his way now that the Russians
were in space they were starting to pay
attention he would get his chance to go
ahead with launching his satellite but
he had to wait for some stupid reason
for the Navy to have first dibs the
Vanguard TV 3 was America's first
attempt to launch a satellite on
December 6th 1957 and as you can see
here at fail spectacular if the Navy was
sloppy and they rushed it the Americans
hoping to have a little bit of their
pride restored instead became a
laughingstock to the Soviet Union
premier Khrushchev hit them with a sick
burn saying the United States sleeps
under a Soviet moon so since the Navy
cocked up their chance Wernher von Braun
finally got the go-ahead on the 31st of
January 1958 Explorer 1 was launched
without incident and like Sputnik this
American satellite would collect
scientific data from space the success
of Explorer 1 cannot be understated as a
loud von Braun to have all the funding
he would need on July 29th 1958 the
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration would be formed NASA
would take the charge in winning the
space race for America and less than a
year later they announced Project
Mercury at a press conference
introducing a plan to put the first
American into space meanwhile the
Soviets were still making headline news
by sending probes to the moon as part of
their lunar program on October 7th 1959
one of these probes call Luna 3 sent
back photographs and for the first time
in history humans can now see what the
dark side of the moon looks like but
this was still more of a sideshow as the
Soviets were also planning to
put a man into space after an intensive
training program the man who would be
chosen for this the Soviet cosmonaut
Yuri Gagarin on the 12th of April 1961
the Vostok 1 rocket was launched
carrying Yuri 17,500 miles an hour each
step of the way another booster rocket
would drop off as he went higher and
higher and higher the g-force pressing
up against his body until the final
rocket stage shut down and Vostok one
reached orbit and like flicking a switch
the g-force was gone I was replaced with
weightlessness and then Yuri looked out
the window of his capsule and became the
first human being to ever see the Earth
from space
[Music]
after just over an hour in orbit the
Vostok re-entered Earth's atmosphere and
as the first man to orbit the Earth Yuri
Gagarin received a hero's welcome
winning many medals and titles including
being awarded by premier khrushchev hero
of the soviet union which was the
highest honor of the nation he also
became an international celebrity as he
traveled all over the globe doing
interviews about his historic adventure
promoting the Soviet Union's superiority
in space to the Americans however it was
another crushing blow to the national
pride and despite their own great
accomplishment of putting Alan Shepard
the first American into space less than
a month later it still wasn't enough
NASA always seemed to be just one step
behind the Soviets and John F Kennedy
the American president decided that
being in second place just wasn't going
to cut it anymore instead of trying to
catch up to the Soviets he would shift
NASA's attention to focus on the end
goal in one of the greatest speeches of
all time he publicly announced that
America would have put a man on the moon
before the end of the decade why some
say the moon why choose this as our goal
and they may we'll ask why climb the
highest mountain why 35 years ago fly
the Atlantic why does Rice play Texas we
choose to go to the moon we choose to go
to the moon
[Applause]
we choose to go to the moon in this
decade and do the other things not
because they are easy but because they
are hard because that goal will serve to
organize and measure the best of our
energies and skills because that
challenge is one that we're willing to
accept one we are unwilling to postpone
and one we intend to win good god I love
that man now that was a president
whatever his real political motivations
may have been supporting all of this it
can't be denied that his passion and
perseverance to get the American people
and Congress behind NASA changed
everything they got better funding
better resources and the Apollo program
was started shortly afterwards with the
goal to put Americans on the moon this
was the tipping point where things would
begin to turn in America's favor it's
just such a shame he didn't live to see
it unfortunately for Sergei Korolev he
would get nowhere near the same kind of
support from his government for his
planned mission to the moon he was
mostly expected to just work with what
he had and most the technology wasn't as
advanced as what the Americans had even
after completing yet another historic
achievement by having Alexei Leonov be
the first man to spacewalk outside his
capsule on the 18th of March 1965 the
real reason why is because the Soviet
Union just saw the space race is yet
another propaganda tool and they weren't
terribly interested in its scientific
advancements the funding he was given
instead was just a fraction of what he
really needed over the coming months
NASA was sending more and more manned
missions into space the formics
spacewalks of their own and doing
docking procedures all of the necessary
steps to prepare for that trip to the
moon at last the Americans were
beginning to overtake the Soviets but
the worst blow to the Soviet space
program came on the 14th of January 1966
when tragically Sergei Korolev died this
was brought about from a kidney disorder
he had picked up during his time in the
gulag and his health had been
deteriorating due to the stress of his
space missions the doctors had
previously warned him about this when he
had
first heart attack in 1962 back down
from his work otherwise they couldn't
guarantee that he would live for much
longer but Sergei persevere despite this
risk fearing that Khrushchev would
cancel the Soviet space program
altogether such was his commitment to
space exploration sad to say but
Korolev's death worked in NASA's favor
von Browns
only true rival was now out of the
picture and they no longer had to truly
concern themselves with the Soviets
catching up and then on December 21st
1968 just over a hundred years after
Jules Verne published his book from the
earth to the moon NASA launched Apollo 8
onboard with 3 astronauts William Anders
Frank Borman and Jim Lovell this time
they were leaving Earth and flying
straight to the moon traveling 234,000
miles going further than any human being
had ever gone before their six-day
mission would be to orbit the moon and
return safely entering its orbit they
became the first human beings to ever
look down on the lunar surface with the
naked eye but even more incredible was
that as they made their way around its
dark side William Anders grabbed a
camera and recorder a truly spectacular
sight the earth rising over the moon's
horizon two more missions would follow
and still the Soviets were nowhere close
to catching up with a manned mission of
their own and then a year later the day
finally came on July 16th 1969 the world
held its breath as Apollo 11 was
launched carrying Neil Armstrong Buzz
Aldrin and Michael Collins to the moon
this was the mission the mission that
would achieve Wernher von Braun's
lifelong dream a fulfill a promise made
by NASA and John F Kennedy to land men
on the moon before the end of the decade
four days later Apollo 11 enter the
moon's orbit as Michael Collins stayed
behind in the command module Neil
Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin descended down
to the surface on the lunar module back
on earth half a billion people were
watching every step of the way marking
it as one of the biggest televised
events in history Neil Armstrong opened
the hatch and began making his way down
the ladder then he said those immortal
words have no glamour
it's one small step for man one giant
leap for me
[Applause]
[Music]
you
true to his words john f kennedy's
proposal to land a man on the moon and
return him safely to earth before the
end of the decade had finally been
achieved however nasa wasn't quite done
yet and would continue with further
missions after Apollo 11 came Apollo 12
another successful moon landing a took
place on November 24th 1969 now
originally NASA had a budget for ten
moon landings but despite how successful
Apollo 11 was there are politicians
pressuring them to cut costs people in
my state have been asking why we're
continuing to fund this program now that
we beat the Russians to the moon as a
result of people like this by the time
Apollo 13 was scheduled to launch on
April 11th 1970 the ten moon landings
were to be cut down to nine and it's
aftermath would cut down even more and
this is obviously where the movie begins
the crew selected for Apollo 13 was Fred
Haise the lunar module pilots played by
Bill Paxton Ken Mattingly the command
module pilot played by Gary Sinise and
finally Jim Lovell the commander played
by Tom Hanks now a cool thing to note
about Jim Lovell is that by this point
he was the world's most traveled
astronauts with 572 hours of spaceflight
with three missions under his belt
including Apollo 8 the first manned
mission to orbit the moon now he would
get the opportunity to land on it
however just a few days before the
mission launch the first bit of bad luck
came when Ken Mattingly was exposed to
German measles as a precaution NASA
replaced him with the backup command
module pilot Jack Swagger's played by
Kevin Bacon now some people use this
last-minute replacement as yet another
example of the superstitious bad luck
looming over the mission all just
because it was the thirteenth Apollo
mission and 13 is seen as an unlucky
number I'm glad to see that the movie
accurately points out that the folks
over at NASA aren't exactly a
superstitious Bunch
I'm gonna walk on the bone marrow
that's really it's 1313 he comes after
12 hun by the way I'm happy to say that
Maryland's initial nervousness about the
mission and is having bad luck because
of the number thirteen is authentically
depicted in the movie even more so when
it's reinforced by this little moment
with Maryland's wedding ring that really
did take place a day before the launch I
was taking a shower and I it just
slipped right off my hand and it went
into the drain and I just was terrified
because to me it was like an omen that
something really was going to happen now
I'm not exactly a superstitious guy but
I do think it's kind of funny how NASA
was almost tempting fate and that's
because Apollo 13 was scheduled to
launch on April 11th 1970 at 13 past
1:00 or in military lingo 13 13 the
reason for this was simply just because
the timing presented the most optimal
conditions that day
NASA was treating it like any other
mission and aside from a bumpy start
with one of the engines had liftoff that
was quickly corrected everything was
above board and just routine it's
nothing routine about flying to the moon
I could write for that I totally agree
with you main unfortunately the public
at the time didn't see it that way the
thing is by Apollo 13 people were so
used to NASA landing men on the moon
that they were just bored by it
apparently they found it so boring that
no news network wanted to show Apollo
13s live TV broadcast all the network's
dumped us well don't say we made gone to
the moon about as exciting as taking a
trip to Pittsburgh now I understand that
the Beatles broke up the day before and
yes that was headline news but seriously
how lame is that I can't help but feel a
little annoyed at how good everyone had
it back then and it's sad to think that
arguably the most memorable thing that
NASA has done since the Apollo program
is this
control to Major Tom you really
[Music]
anyway about six minutes after their
live TV broadcast which nobody watched
Mission Control asked Jack Swagger's to
stir the hydrogen and oxygen tanks in
the service module hey we've got a fat
one here what did you do nothing let's
do the text
what's the crew of Apollo 13 a Mission
Control didn't know at the time was that
the insulation covering the wires inside
oxygen tank number two had accidentally
melted off during a dress rehearsal a
few weeks before so when Jack Swagger's
flipped the switch a spark from an
exposed wire caused a fire and ignited
the highly concentrated oxygen tanks
back in Mission Control the readings on
their computers were going off the chart
when they received that famous radio
message houston we have a problem now
that famous line was actually shortened
in the movie what was actually said was
with all the confusion Mission Control
thought the problem had to be
instrumental since so many things were
going wrong at once whilst the Apollo 13
crew thought they had been hit by a
meteor this was just for the first few
minutes until Jim Lovell looked at the
window
we are venting something out in the
space this was extremely bad the oxygen
supply wasn't just used for breathing
was also mixed with the hydrogen in the
fuel cells to generate water and power
one tank was completely depleted and the
second was bleeding oxygen very quickly
in order to hold the flow Houston
decided that the reactant feed valve
from the two fuel cells had to be closed
and when they gave the order to Apollo
13 it crushed them because it could only
mean one thing we just lost the moon
the reason why was because once they had
shut down those valves they couldn't be
turned back on again they also knew that
they needed to fuel cells to land on the
moon what little oxygen they had left
was in the command module small reserve
tank but the real problem wasn't that
they could no longer land on the moon
but if they can make it back home alive
the command module by this point would
be out of oxygen and power within
minutes to conserve as much as they
could for reentry in Earth's atmosphere
they had to shut it down and move
themselves into the lunar module or LEM
and use it as a lifeboat but before they
could do that they had to transfer vital
data from the command modules computers
onto the lems computers now the good
thing about the lemmas that had its own
supply of power and oxygen just in the
nick of time the crew achieved
everything they needed to do and moved
into the LEM whilst all this was going
on Apollo 13s mission was finally making
headline news people all around the
world watched as reports came in of how
perilous the situation was there was a
very real possibility that Lovell
hastened Swaggart would make another
record for the history books to be the
first Americans to die in space but the
crew didn't have the luxury all the time
to contemplate their odds after they
corrected their course they had to focus
on the next problem with extremely
limited power how could they return to
Earth the only engine we've got with
enough power for a direct abort is the
SPS on a service module what Lovell was
told us he could have been damaged in an
explosion so let's consider that engine
dead
we like that thing up cabal the whole
works just too risky so what was decided
instead was to have Apollo 13 continued
to the moon there they would use the
moon's gravity to pull them into orbit
and with a brief engine burn from the
LEM it would slingshot them back to
earth but there was also another issue
Mission Control knew that without being
able to use the engine from the service
module
Apollo 13 dirty back would take much
longer the thing is the LEM was built to
land on the moon but was designed to
only support two men for two days and
based on their close proximity to the
moon already the lems week engine burn
would instead take them four days to
return to Earth meaning the very real
possibility that they could run out of
water power
and ere long before they've reached it
as Apollo 13 approached the moon's orbit
the film appropriately shows this very
somber scene when the astronauts look at
the moon out the window
[Music]
coming up on Mount Maryland
Jim you got to take a look at this I
honestly can't even begin to imagine how
gut-wrenching that must be to be that
close to the moon closer than most
people have ever been only to see it
slip away as Apollo 13 reappeared from
the far side of the Moon the crew fired
the lens engine directing them to earth
and then afterwards to conserve all the
power they possibly could for life
support communication and later for
re-entry
Houston told him to switch off all
non-critical systems including the
heating eventually got so cold in there
that it was like being in a fridge the
duration of their journey back to earth
would be an extreme discomfort as it
would be too cold to sleep and their
food and water would freeze but to
ensure their survival they had to do it
with power consumption taking care of
the next problem that had to be fixed
was how to deal with the carbon dioxide
building up in the spacecraft now
normally they would use lithium
hydroxide canisters which filter carbon
dioxide to make the air breathable and
they did have plenty on board from both
the command module and the lunar module
but there was a serious design flaw
we had a co2 filter problem on the lunar
module five filters on the limb which
were meant for two guys for a day and a
half so I told the doctor they're
already up to eight on the gauges
anything over 15 and you get prepared
judgment blackouts the beginnings of
brain asphyxia without the scrubbers in
the command module it takes square
cartridges ones on the limb around so
the engineers back on earth using
nothing with equipment available on
Apollo 13 had to figure out how to fit
us
we're peg into a round hole amazingly a
solution was found with duct tape part
of a flight manual and some plastic bags
they were able to direct the astronauts
over the radio on how to recreate the
process for the next few days Apollo 13
drifted onwards to earth as its crew
struggled with freezing conditions lack
of sleep and dehydration on the sixth
day earth was finally beginning to fill
their windows in preparation for this
Houston told them a new course
correction was needed as the angle they
were approaching was too shallow meaning
that they would skim the Earth's
atmosphere and bounce off into space
unfortunately they still couldn't power
up their computers yet to give them a
reading so they would have to fly blind
and use a visual reference the Stars can
be counted on as there is still a lot of
debris floating outside so instead they
used the earth itself keeping it in the
window the whole crew had to work
together by firing the lens engine for
the precise duration needed as they flew
manually they only had a matter of
seconds to study the spacecraft as it
pitched and Lord from the force of the
engine
just in the nick of time they had
achieved the correct angle they needed
the next and final step was to prepare
for reentry
both Mission Control and the crew had
been anticipating this nervously the
command module had never been powered
down before in flight and whether being
exposed to the cold vacuum of space for
so long the main concern was whether it
could even be turned back on and then
there was also the issue about the
build-up of condensation everything
inside was absolutely covered with
droplets of water from the walls the
floors the ceiling and the control
panels and there was a very good chance
that condensation was building up behind
the control panels to the possibility of
a short-circuit wasn't far from
everyone's mind fortunately all the
systems were switched on without
incident and the spacecraft came to life
next they disconnected the service
module and as it drifted off the crew
could now see where the damage had been
from the explosion reason why everyone
was so concerned was that if the heat
shield had been at all compromised then
the astronauts would most likely burn up
in Earth's atmosphere but there was
nothing they could do about it
only a few hours left until reentry all
they could do now was hope for the best
with everything ready to go the crew
moved into the command module and
disconnected the LEM the portion of the
ship that had protected them for so long
throughout the entire ordeal the command
module then began to descend into the
atmosphere the whole world held its
breath as had watched everything unfold
on the news hoping and praying that the
angle was still good that the heat
shield hadn't been damaged and the
parachutes hadn't frozen in space the
time will take for Mission Control to
know if Apollo 13 had made it was
calculated to be around 3 minutes reason
why is because communications are
temporarily disrupted in reentry within
that time frame
due to the extreme buildup of heat and
the ionization of the gases around the
spacecraft
the command module roaster temperatures
are 5000 degrees as it hurled towards
the Earth
going 25,000 miles an hour three minutes
went by and still not a word seconds
began to drag as the blackout continued
and then after six minutes a voice
emerge from the radio
[Music]
against all odds the crew of Apollo 13
returned safely the heat shield
withstood the intense heat of reentry
and the parachutes had successfully
deployed the extra delay in the blackout
was caught by the command module coming
in at a shallower angle but otherwise
they had made it they splashed down the
South Pacific Ocean where the USS iwo
jima was waiting for them with a rescue
crew all over the world people let out a
huge sigh of relief as they watched the
live TV broadcast later Apollo 13
mission would be called a successful
failure Jim Lovell Fred Hayes and Jack
Swagger's may have been denied their
chance to walk on the moon but the
return home is nonetheless a true
victory made possible by the
extraordinary professionalism and
dedication by Mission Control and each
other
[Music]
as you all know I'm not exactly fond of
inaccuracies almost every historical
movie has them but most of them are
justified to enhance the drama within
the story sometimes it's just an excuse
to cover up sloppy writing but Apollo 13
is a rare example where I happen to
agree with mostly in activities
presented on screen but don't get me
wrong
these moments are far and few between
they really did do a fantastic job to
try and be as faithful to the real-life
story as possible but only to an extent
you see if they made this particular
movie to be too authentic then it really
would have been boring to watch in
Apollo 13s case the movie not only has
to be authentic but has to convey to the
audience what is going on in the
simplest way possible obviously we can't
understand every single thing said in
the movie since we are clearly not
astronauts I can't even pretend to
understand the complexity of half the
stuff they're talking about that's why
throughout the film some of their
high-tech jargon is simplified but even
that sometimes is not enough because as
human beings what we tend to respond to
most are visuals this is the reason why
the film feels like it has to almost
spell things out for us so you're
telling me you can only give our guys 45
hours that brings them to a bat there we
gotta find a way to make this fit into
the hole for this using nothing but that
in all honesty I imagine that most of
these guys were completely up to speed
with one another and most likely talking
a mile a minute but as long as we the
audience gets a generally good idea of
what's going on then it's absolutely
justified in my opinion another thing is
if we can't understand the gravity of
the situation behind what's being said
we can certainly pick it up by the
emotions our main characters convey all
I did was stir those tanks who's that
gauge reading before he hit the switch
you don't tell me how to fly the damn
see am i right do a job ask me to stir
the damn tanks and I stir the tank now
just to let you know this confrontation
absolutely never happened
in fact there were no confrontations of
any kind that took place on Apollo 13
despite the discomforts and the dangers
they had to endure cooperation between
the crew members was never an issue they
were all in this together and focusing
on anything else was just a waste of
time I'm not gonna go bouncing off the
walls for ten minutes and we're just
gonna end up right back here with the
same problems trying to figure out how
to stay alive this possible suggestion
of Jack Swagger being incompetent is
totally fabricated in the movie I mean
like how in the hell was he supposed to
know that the oxygen tank was going to
explode just by flipping a switch if
there was even a slight chance that he
wasn't up to the task do you really
think he would even be in outer space to
begin with these emotional outbursts
that occur throughout the film obviously
didn't happen but they're meant to
heighten the drama and to emphasize the
stress and the toll it was having all
these astronauts they're freezing cold
they've had no sleep and they're
suffering for the throbbing headaches
because of their lack of oxygen any one
of us would quite naturally be bitching
and moaning but the fact that these guys
never did really does emphasize how they
were the best of the best however in the
movie we see people frequently snap at
each other whether it be on board Apollo
13 or even back in Houston they're
working on it now all over the simulator
and get an estimate what the procedures
now this is actually where history works
against the movie because not once -
Gene Kranz ever snap has any of his crew
nor does any of the astronauts snap at
Houston queries watch that middle gimbal
we don't want you coming off well
informed here's I'm well aware the
goddamn gimbal
if you actually listen to the real audio
from Apollo 13 and compare it to what is
portrayed in the movie then you will be
amazed to discover how absolutely calm
the real guys were even during the most
intense scene in the entire movie
houston we have a problem
we have a main bus b undervolt we've got
a lot of thrust arrested or accused in
that we just went offline oh there's
another master alarm Houston Roger man b
undervolt and bio 13 we're looking at it
right now go ahead up the tunnel again
yeah now I swear that I didn't just look
for the most boring clips I could find
this is pretty much consistent with all
their rushes although it doesn't sound
like this very much going on they're
actually performing some very
nail-biting stuff the fact that Mission
Control and the crew of Apollo 13 were
able to keep their cool that the entire
ordeal is nothing short of astonishing
but I think it's fair to say that if
Apollo 13 was 100% accurate with how
these guys actually talked then most
audience members would fall asleep
instead the authenticity comes from the
event scene in the movie and especially
the visuals for example to get the
actors to have cold breath they would
freeze the set about 35 degrees
Fahrenheit or 1.6 degrees Celsius
there's also the re-entry sequence which
I absolutely love when the command
module began to heat up all the
condensation dripped away the real Jim
Lovell described it by saying that it
rained inside the CM and in the movie we
actually see it but the most authentic
parts of Apollo 13 without a doubt are
the zero gravity sequences and the
reason why they're so convincing is
because they're real during production
NASA allowed the filmmakers special use
of their reduced gravity aircraft the
kc-135 on board the plane they had built
smaller versions of the set for the
actors to work in and as the plane
descended sharply the cast and the crew
were able to experience nearly 25
seconds of weightlessness when you're
weightless it feels like you've just
been spun upside down all the blood goes
into your head and it feels like like
giving you a rock oh plane at the
amusement park it just feels like they
you've just got spun upside down you
think suddenly like you think hey I'm
upside down no I'm not what's wrong why
is it different
oh I'm floating seriously how awesome is
that
now let's discuss some of the
inaccuracies one big moment in the film
is when the astronauts climb into the
lunar module and use it as a lifeboat
whilst the guys back in Houston racked
their brains on how to make it support
three men for four days instead of what
it was designed to do which was two men
for two days now whilst all this is true
the movie does make it appear that
Mission Control improvised a lot of the
stuff on the fly
reality NASA had already stimulated this
lifeboat procedure before in that
scenario they pretended that something
had contaminated the atmosphere in the
command module and the crew had to get
into the LEM and vent everything out so
during the Apollo 13 mission people
already remember that exercise when
everything was going badly in fact it's
probably because of that these
astronauts survived there was also
another similar example in the film when
the problem came with the carbon dioxide
filters from the command module and the
LEM in preparation for the Apollo 8
mission there had been another
simulation where a cabin fan had been
jams due to a loose screw to fix the
problem
they used a vacuum cleaner from the
command module and some cuts of plastic
bags and taped it to the lithium
hydroxide canisters and blew through it
with a vacuum cleaner
so again during the Apollo 13 mission
people were like hey do you remember
that simulation we did back on eight and
then of course there's the big moments
in the film where it seems that Ken
Mattingly single-handedly saves the day
by figuring out how to find more power
for the command module when this crew on
13 need to turn everything on in reality
that simulation was more of a
verification of an already written
process a bunch of guys had already
worked it out and written down the
procedures to do it so the simulation
was actually done to confirm whether the
numbers were right knowing the truth of
course shouldn't take away your
enjoyment of the movie as I feel that it
was necessary to condense a lot of what
happened I mean you have to remember
that these guys were out in space for
several days and the last big inaccuracy
in the movie that I can think of is when
we see the crew begin to suffer the
effects of carbon dioxide poisoning we
see Jack Swagger's have blurry vision
and he's having trouble thinking now
whilst it's true that there was a
buildup of co2 inside the spacecraft
before they fixed the filters it was
never as dangerously high as the thumb
suggests otherwise the astronauts would
have been unable to carry out their
complicated tasks you see when you get
co2 poisoning your brain is starved of
oxygen and the less you have the more
incapacitated you become before you
eventually die from it this is just
another example of the film heightening
up the drama to inform the audience with
his visuals the dangers out astronauts
face
as a historical film Apollo 13 is damn
near perfect to this execution it stays
as true to real-life events as it
possibly can and by doing so is able to
shine the light on the incredible deeds
carried out by Apollo 13 and Mission
Control it is indeed a tribute to this
amazing period in time and mostly
inaccuracies are presented in this
review of in my opinion justified in the
movie people may not have shattered each
other they may not have been really from
the effects of co2 but the stresses and
the dangers they faced were very real
indeed and the fact they were able to
stay calm and collected throughout the
entire ordeal speaks volumes about their
professionalism and you can clearly see
the effort mate in making this film you
get a sense of a genuine enthusiasm and
a great love of history so much so that
literally bleeds out of the screen and
this is all I want from a historical
picture I just want the filmmakers to
care as much about the history as I do
because when they do you get a real
classic on your hands people will watch
it and understand why Apollo 13 is
referenced as NASA's finest hour a lot
of Americans who watch this film and
they will feel proud not just of Apollo
13 but what their country accomplished
for all of mankind in the space race as
rightfully they should I also feel that
sense of pride for them but I also feel
a tinge of regret it's sad to think that
humanity's greatest achievement landing
on the moon was nearly 50 years ago half
a century two thousand one has come and
gone and the
iPads and we have Skype was still no
closer to Stanley Kubrick's vision of
the future a film he made before Neil
Armstrong's first steps on the moon he
made it in a time when people were
optimistic about what the next century
would bring in interplanetary travel we
still have yet to see that future the
last time humanity was on another
celestial body was on the moon in 1972
and I sincerely hope that within our
lifetime we might return to it again
well that about wraps it up my name is
Nick Hodges and thanks for watching
history buffs and remember if you like
the show help the channel grow if you
wish to support history buffs you can
now do so at patreon and as always let
me know in the comment section what you
thought about Apollo 13 and of course
what historical movie should I review
next in the meantime check out the
history bus Twitter and Facebook pages
for new updates until then I'll see you
next time
you
[Music]